.\" Copyright (c) 2022-2024 Oracle.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.TH IOCTL-XFS-RTGROUP-GEOMETRY 2 2022-08-18 "XFS"
.SH NAME
ioctl_xfs_rtgroup_geometry \- query XFS realtime group geometry information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B #include <xfs/xfs_fs.h>
.br
.B #include <xfs/xfs_fs_staging.h>
.PP
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", XFS_IOC_RTGROUP_GEOMETRY, struct xfs_rtgroup_geometry *" arg );
.SH DESCRIPTION
This XFS ioctl retrieves the geometry information for a given realtime group.
The geometry information is conveyed in a structure of the following form:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_rtgroup_geometry {
	__u32  rg_number;
	__u32  rg_length;
	__u32  rg_sick;
	__u32  rg_checked;
	__u32  rg_flags;
	__u32  rg_pad;
	__u64  rg_reserved[13];
};
.fi
.in
.TP
.I rg_number
The caller must set this field to the index of the realtime group that the
caller wishes to learn about.
.TP
.I rg_length
The length of the realtime group is returned in this field, in units of
filesystem blocks.
.I rg_flags
The caller can set this field to change the operational behavior of the ioctl.
Currently no flags are defined, so this field must be zero.
.TP
.IR rg_reserved " and " rg_pad
All reserved fields will be set to zero on return.
.PP
The fields
.IR rg_sick " and " rg_checked
indicate the relative health of various realtime group metadata:
.IP \[bu] 2
If a given sick flag is set in
.IR rg_sick ,
then that piece of metadata has been observed to be damaged.
The same bit will be set in
.IR rg_checked .
.IP \[bu]
If a given sick flag is set in
.I rg_checked
and is not set in
.IR rg_sick ,
then that piece of metadata has been checked and is not faulty.
.IP \[bu]
If a given sick flag is not set in
.IR rg_checked ,
then no conclusion can be made.
.PP
The following flags apply to these fields:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_RTGROUP_GEOM_SICK_SUPER
Realtime group superblock.
.TP
.B XFS_RTGROUP_GEOM_SICK_BITMAP
Realtime bitmap for this group.
.TP
.B XFS_RTGROUP_GEOM_SICK_RTRMAPBT
Reverse mapping btree for this group.
.RE
.SH RETURN VALUE
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.PP
.SH ERRORS
Error codes can be one of, but are not limited to, the following:
.TP
.B EFSBADCRC
Metadata checksum validation failed while performing the query.
.TP
.B EFSCORRUPTED
Metadata corruption was encountered while performing the query.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The specified realtime group number is not valid for this filesystem.
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error was encountered while performing the query.
.SH CONFORMING TO
This API is specific to XFS filesystem on the Linux kernel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ioctl (2)
